-*- text -*-

$Id$


		   LIST OF USER REQUESTS FOR LARCENY


This is the list of (largely minor) requests for larceny that are not
outright bugs.  See also the file WISHLIST, which is the list of
(largely major) requests from the developers.

001  (v1.0a1 / dougo)  990527
     Title: Fix inconsistency in error handling
     Category: Fix lossage
     System modules affected: Library
     Assessment: Desirable.  ERROR or ERROR-HANDLER gets a new spec.
                 Code that relies on old spec must change.

     Bring the interfaces of ERROR and ERROR-HANDLER into sync: the
     former prints all its arguments in order, without spaces; the latter
     has magic behavior for the first argument (to be somewhat compatible
     with Chez Scheme's weird definition of ERROR).  The most reasonable
     fix is to remove Chez Scheme "compatibility".

002  (v1.0a1 / dougo) 990525
     Title: A macro-expander that expands user macros only.
     Category: New functionality
     System modules affected: Macro expander, at least.
     Evaluation: Desirable.  Possibly a lot of work.

     Provide a procedure MACRO-EXPAND1 that expands user macros only
     but leaves "system" macros untouched.  This mechanism is useful
     in debugging user-written macros, where expansion of system
     macros makes the resulting output hard to read.

     It's not clear to what extent the current macro expander can accomodate
     this request because it depends on expanding everything down to the
     core forms to discover variable bindings.  Just passing the current
     expander an environment that contains only the user macros is not
     correct because the resulting expansion may capture user variables.
     (It may be sufficient for debugging, however, thus for the intended
     use of the procedure.  Thus it may be that we should just generalize
     macro-expand to take an optional syntactic environment.)

003  (v1.0a1 / dougo) 990418
     Title: A command line switch that prints the version number
     Category: New functionality for CLI users
     System modules affected: RTS
     Assessment: Feeping creaturitis.

     Have a command line switch -version or -v that prints the version
     number and exits.

004  (v1.0a1 / dougo) 
     Title: A command line switch to control the use of .larceny
     Category: New functionality for CLI users
     System modules affected: Shell script, REPL
     Assessment: Feeping creaturitis.

     Have a command line switch or switches that (a) disable loading of
     the .larceny file, and (b) select a different file to load.
