Installing Larceny


Short version:

Put Larceny's main directory wherever you like, and give it
whatever name you like.

Copy the executable scripts (larceny and scheme-script) wherever
you like, and edit them to set LARCENY_ROOT to the absolute
path of Larceny's main directory.  (On Linux systems, you can
just create links to those scripts instead of copying them, and
you don't need to edit them.)  You may also want to copy or
create links to the compile-larceny and compile-stale scripts.

If the directory that contains the executable scripts is not
already part of your path, then add it to your path.

If that doesn't work, keep reading.


System requirements:

To build Larceny from source code, see HOWTO-BUILD.  Prebuilt
binary distributions of Larceny are available for machines with
ARMv7 or Intel IA32 and compatible (i386 or x86-32) processors
running the following operating systems:

    Linux
    MacOS X
    Windows XP or later

Although Larceny still uses 32-bit pointers, it will run on
64-bit machines provided the necessary 32-bit compatibility
libraries have been installed.

On Linux machines, the 32-bit libraries can be installed by
incanting something like

    sudo apt-get install lib32z1
    sudo apt-get install libc6-i386

(The second of those should be unnecessary because libc6-i386
should be installed automatically when lib32z1 is installed.)
To build Larceny from source, you would also need to install
libc6-dev-i386.

On Macintoshes with Intel processors, the 32-bit libraries
should already be installed.  If they aren't, installing the
Apple Developer command-line tools should fix the problem.

On Windows, the DEP feature must be told to allow Larceny to
opt-out.  (See below.)


Long version:

After you download a binary distribution of Larceny or build from
source, there will be several scripts for starting Larceny in the root
of the Larceny tree.  These can be run from that location, regardless of
where you keep the tree.  If you want to make Larceny available to other
users of your system, however, or if you want to install the executables
in a standard place, this document will tell you how.

Larceny is usually started by a script, which has two functions:

 - It sets an environment variable LARCENY_ROOT to the absolute path of
   the Larceny tree, which is assumed to be the same as the directory
   that the script is in.

 - It dispatches on the name of the script, to choose both a Larceny
   executable (such as larceny.bin) and a heap image (such as
   larceny.heap).

Which scripts you have depends on what platform you are using:

 - Windows: Batch files "larceny.bat" and "twobit.bat"
 - Linux, Mac OS X: Shell scripts "larceny", "scheme-script",
    compile-larceny, and "compile-stale"

Note that "twobit" and "twobit.heap" are no longer distributed
as part of Larceny's binary distributions.

If you would like to move a larceny or twobit script to another
directory but not rename it, it is sufficient to hard-code the
location of Larceny's root directory into the script.  For
example, to install Petit Larceny into /usr/local on Linux,
untar the Larceny tree as /usr/local/lib/larceny.  Then copy
the scripts "larceny", "scheme-script", and "compile-stale" to
/usr/local/bin, editing the first two by uncommenting the line
that sets LARCENY_ROOT, and setting it to /usr/local/lib/larceny.

If you would like to change something else, such as the name of
a script, editing the script should not be too difficult.

Larceny is one of the few implementations of R6RS Scheme that
provides the scheme-script feature proposed by the R6RS editors,
but other implementations may define their own scheme-script.  If
you want Larceny to execute your Scheme scripts, then you should
use the which command to make sure Larceny's scheme-script comes
before any others in your execution path.  (By the way, Larceny's
scheme-script feature now executes programs in R7RS mode rather
than R6RS.  Because Larceny's implementation of the R7RS acts as
a superset of the R6RS standard, all programs that run in R7RS
mode should also run in R6RS mode, but the reverse is not true.)

Windows and DEP:

Larceny will not run if the DEP feature of Windows is set to
AlwaysOn.  To set the DEP feature to OptOut, which we recommend,
someone with administrative privileges must do the following:

    Click on the Start icon
    Type "cmd" into the search box.
    In the list of search results, right click the "cmd" program.
    Choose "Run as administrator".
    When asked whether you want to allow the program to make
        changes to this computer, answer Yes.
    Type the following command:

        bcdedit.exe /set nx OptOut

    Restart Windows.
