Welcome to Common Larceny

This directory contains the necessary scripts, workspaces, programs,
etc. that are used to build and distribute Common Larceny.

----------------------------------

Distributing Common Larceny


Common Larceny is currently distributed in four formats:  a gzipped tar
file, a Microsoft Windows Installer file (msi), a Windows zip file,
and a PLT file.  All four formats have the same content, but some
formats offer extra functionality (for example, the MSI file can
install shortcuts).  These files are published by placing them on the
web server.

The four files are named LarcenySDK, but the file extensions differ.
The LarcenySDK contains all the files needed to rebuild CommonLarceny
from the sources via cross-compilation from MzScheme.  It also
contains a pre-built image.

The process of creating a CommonLarceny release will be describe here
in a dependency-oriented fashion.  The rationale for each step should
therefore be obvious, but the order of steps may not be.  A review of
the steps will be presented with a suggested order in which to take
them.

The `distribution' subdirectory of the CommonLarceny directory will
be where the various SDK bundles will be created.  This directory will
be created if necessary, but it may already exist because of prior
bundling.  In addition to the distribution bundles, there will be some
auxiliary files in the distribution directory:  a non-gzipped TAR file
and some windows installer bootstrap files may be there.  These files
are not placed on the web server.

Some bundling tools work by creating a snapshot of some directory
structure.  The directory structure will be replicated exactly at the
user's site.  Using the development directory structure for this
purpose may be a problem because it contains files that do not belong
in the distribution and certain files need to be renamed or moved in
order to create the distribution.  Therefore, the bundling process
works on a temporary copy of the directory structure.

Once a temporary copy of the Common Larceny distribution is created,
an archiving program such as WinZip or tar is used to create the
distribution bundle.  The files

    CL\VSNET\Larceny\Bundle\bundleplt.ss
    CL\VSNET\Larceny\Bundle\bundletar.ss
    CL\VSNET\Larceny\Bundle\bundlezip.ss

contain Scheme code that performs the archiving.  Unfortunately, the
absolute path to the archiving program is `hard wired' in to the
Scheme code because I couldn't figure out a reasonable way to
parameterize the code.

All three of these programs load the file
  CL\files.ss

which contains definitions of two functions:

  larceny-distribution-directories
  A function of no arguments that returns a list of strings that
  represent the relative paths of the subdirectories to be archived.

  larceny-distribution-files
  A function of no arguments that returns a list of string that
  represent the relative paths of the files to be archived.

These two functions are currently implemented by simple literal
enumeration of the directories and files, but a more automated way of
determining what goes into the release should be written at some
point.  The archiving scripts create a temporary directory, create the
subdirectories returned by larceny-distribution-directories, copy the
files returned by larceny-distribution-files, and call the appropriate
archiver on the copied directory structure.  The directory structure
is not afterwards deleted, so occasional manual cleaning is needed.

There is one bit of trickiness that should be pointed out.  The build
process creates an executable named `dotnet.heap.exe', but the
distribution process renames this to `CommonLarceny.exe'.  This
renaming is done by the archiving scripts when the file is copied.

Creating the MSI file involves using Visual Studio.  In theory, the
full Visual Studio IDE need not be used and it ought to be runnable
from the command line.  The CL\VSNET\Larceny subdirectory contains the
Visual Studio `solution' file (for Visual Studio version 7.0).  The
file

   CL\VSNET\Larceny\Msi\WindowsInstall.vdproj

contains the information about what goes into the MSI file.

In order to simplify the process of distribution, the various scripts
that build the tgz, plt, and zip archives have been associated with a
`Bundle' `project' in the `Larceny solution'.  Furthermore, the
scripts necessary to cross-compile Larceny and to compile the C#
runtime have *also* been placed in appropriate `projects', so it is
possible to build and disribute Common Larceny in all its formats by
building the `solution'.





