Building and using SPARC-native Larceny
24 November 2004 / lth


HOW TO BUILD LARCENY AND USE THE BUILD ENVIRONMENT

General build instructions are in HOWTO-BUILD.  The larceny executable
is called larceny.bin and the heap image is called sparc.heap.  Both
are deposited in the top-level directory if the build succeeds.


COMPILING AND LOADING YOUR OWN PROGRAMS

It is possible to load compiled Scheme code dynamically.  The procedure
COMPILE-FILE compiles a Scheme source file into a compiled .FASL format
file:

    > (compile-file "fib.sch")
    > (load "fib.fasl")
    > (fib 10)
    55


BUILDING AN APPLICATION

Since Larceny supports loading of arbitrary dynamic code and heap
dumping, there is no "application" concept as such.  You simply compile
the files you want to include in the application using COMPILE-FILE,
then load the resulting .FASL files using LOAD, and dump the new heap
image using DUMP-INTERACTIVE-HEAP (or even DUMP-HEAP).  See the user's
manual for more information on these procedures.


COMPILING TWOBIT

A simple abstraction in Util/sparc-unix.sch is called BUILD-TWOBIT:

    > (build-twobit)

The BUILD-TWOBIT command compiles all the Twobit source files.  To dump
a heap image containing the compiled development environment, first
compile twobit, then quit Larceny and restart it, using larceny.bin and
sparc.heap and requesting the nongenerational garbage collector:

    $ ./larceny.bin -stopcopy ./sparc.heap

Then load the following script to load the compiler and dump a suitable
heap image:

    > (load "Util/twobit-heap.sch")

This leaves the heap image twobit.heap in the current directory,
containing the compiler and debugger.  This heap image is suitable
mainly for compiler development.

See a later section for how to turn Twobit into a standalone compiler
for other kinds of development.


BUILDING STANDARD HEAP IMAGES

Similarly to Util/twobit-heap.sch there are two other scripts that
create standard heap images.  Both must be loaded on top of sparc.heap
as outlined above.

Util/r5rs-heap.sch

  Creates a minimal heap image called r5rs.heap: like the heap generated
  by BUILD-HEAP but with a pretty-printer installed.

  To set up for this script, evaluate

    > (build-r5rs-files)

  in the development environment to compile the pretty-printer.

Util/larceny-heap.sch

  Creates a maximal heap image called larceny.heap: it contains the compiler, 
  installed in such a way that every source file loaded will be compiled as 
  it is loaded, many useful procedures and macros, the debugger, the pretty
  printer, and a foreign function interface.

  To set up for this script, evaluate

    > (build-larceny-files)

  in the development environment to compile the compiler; once it has
  been loaded by the script it takes care of compiling everything else.


INSTALLING TWOBIT ON YOUR SYSTEM

The larceny executable and the heap images are generally completely
moveable, so installing Larceny is simply a matter of copying these
files and setting up a script that runs Larceny with the desired
parameters.

The Scripts directory contains two scripts, "larceny" and "twobit",
that are suitable.


--- Local Variables: ---
--- mode: text ---
--- indent-tabs-mode: nil ---
--- End: ---
